[KEP-267] Rotate Kubelet Server Certificate Retrospective KEP (#4411)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-auth/267-kubelet-server-certificate-bootstrap-rotation/README.md

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> This is retrospective KEP description for the feature `RotateKubeletServerCertificate`.
> 
> The feature gate `RotateKubeletServerCertificate` allows to configure kubelet to
> get a server certificate for the kubelet from the Certificate Signing Request
> API instead of generating one self signed and auto rotates the certificate as
> expiration approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This KEP proposes a mechanism to allow the kubelet to request and then use a certificate
using the Kubernetes CertificateSigningRequest (CSR) API. A kubelet that can authenticate to the
cluster's control plane can use that mechanism to support automatic certificate rotation
before the existing certificate expires. Certificates are only issued to nodes if their CSR is
explicitly approved.
```

I'd add a Background heading later in the KEP that explains why it's retrospective.

## Motivation

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster operators want TLS between their nodes and the control plane. However, managing the
certificates at scale is problematic. Kubernetes provides APIs to define X.509 certificates, signing
requests for those certificates, and even trust anchors.

As a cluster operator, automating the rotation of kubelet X.509 certificates has the potential to replace
significant toil with an easy and secure ongoing process.

### Background

Kubernetes v1.7 introduced kubelet server certificate rotation as alpha.
```

The feature is heavily used and is a part of [CIS Kubernetes benchmark](https://www.cisecurity.org/benchmark/kubernetes):

> 1.3.6 Ensure that the `RotateKubeletServerCertificate` argument is set to true

This indicates feature maturity and high production readiness.

The outstanding work of generalizing the approach certificate requests got
approved will require a new KEP.

### Goals

- ability to configure kubelet to get a server certificate for the kubelet from

>   the Certificate Signing Request API instead of generating one self signed

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
  the CertificateSigningRequest API instead of generating one self signed
```

- auto-rotate the certificate nearing expiration using Certificate Signing
  Request API

### Non-Goals

> - built-in support for approving CSRs nodes request (not currently done because

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- built-in support for approving CSRs that nodes have requested (omitted because
```

  there is not a way to determine if a node controls a given IP or DNS name)
- ability to limit the addresses/hostnames a node requests in its cert
  (currently, nodes request all addresses reported by the cloud provider, and
  the selection of which address to use is done on the API server side)

## Proposal

Documentation for the feature can be found here:

> https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-tls-bootstrapping/#certificate-rotation

Reviewer: Please frame this as an outline of what we're proposing (kubelet changes & API server changes); it's OK to copy text but just a link doesn't seem right.

The starting point would be Kubernetes without of the coded gated by `RotateKubeletServerCertificate`.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

The note about default implementation that will not approve certificate requests

> is already a part of documentation. See the Note on this page: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-tls-bootstrapping/#certificate-rotation

Reviewer: Please repeat it here, even so.

### Risks and Mitigations

The feature was in heavy production use for a while. Likely no risks will emerge
with locking the feature gate.

## Design Details

Here are limited design definition for the retrospective KEP.

Implementation PRs:
- Feature gate introduced: [#45059](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/45059)

> - Feature promoted to GA: [#51045](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/51045)

Reviewer: I recommend adding a bit more detail. These just link to code. The full details might not be needed but we should write up more. That will also help people who are reviewing the docs for the GA graduation.

### Enabling the feature

`ServerTLSBootstrap` is added to the KubeletConfig to enable rotation of the server certificate.

```golang
 // serverTLSBootstrap enables server certificate bootstrap. Instead of self
 // signing a serving certificate, the Kubelet will request a certificate from
 // the 'certificates.k8s.io' API. This requires an approver to approve the
 // certificate signing requests (CSR). The RotateKubeletServerCertificate feature
 // must be enabled when setting this field.
 // Default: false
 // +optional
 ServerTLSBootstrap bool `json:"serverTLSBootstrap,omitempty"`
```

> The corresponding CLI (which CLI for Kubelet are deprecated) is `--rotate-server-certificates`.

Reviewer: What does this mean? I am not sure I understand.

When the feature gate `RotateKubeletServerCertificate` is true, then `ServerTLSBootstrap` is also required to be true.

As this feature has been in beta since 1.11, there is little worry that this feature will be off in production clusters.

### Implementation

[certificate](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/pkg/kubelet/certificate) contains the implementation of this feature.

This features creates the object `NewKubeletServerCertificateManager`.

### Metrics

Three metrics were added for this feature.

> - "server_expiration_renew_errors"
> - "certificate_manager_server_rotation_seconds"
> - "certificate_manager_server_ttl_seconds"

Reviewer: Is this right?
```suggestion
- `server_expiration_renew_errors` (counter)
- `certificate_manager_server_rotation_seconds` (histogram)
- `certificate_manager_server_ttl_seconds` (histogram)
```

    60,        // 1  minute
    3600,      // 1  hour
    14400,     // 4  hours
    86400,     // 1  day
    604800,    // 1  week
    2592000,   // 1  month
    7776000,   // 3  months
    15552000,  // 6  months
    31104000,  // 1  year
    124416000, // 4  years
   },
   StabilityLevel: compbasemetrics.ALPHA,
  },
  	legacyregistry.RawMustRegister(compbasemetrics.NewGaugeFunc(
		&compbasemetrics.GaugeOpts{
			Subsystem: metrics.KubeletSubsystem,
			Name:      "certificate_manager_server_ttl_seconds",
			Help: "Gauge of the shortest TTL (time-to-live) of " +
				"the Kubelet's serving certificate. The value is in seconds " +
				"until certificate expiry (negative if already expired). If " +
				"serving certificate is invalid or unused, the value will " +
				"be +INF.",
			StabilityLevel: compbasemetrics.ALPHA,
		},
		func() float64 {
			if c := m.Current(); c != nil && c.Leaf != nil {
				return math.Trunc(time.Until(c.Leaf.NotAfter).Seconds())
			}
			return math.Inf(1)
		},
	))
```

These metrics are all in alpha stage so it is recommended to promote these metrics to GA.

These metrics should be promoted to [beta](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/122834

> ) before GA.

Author: This is mostly because they were alpha so I would think they should go alpha -> beta -> ga?

### Test Plan

Configuration testing is already done.

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

None

##### Unit tests

There is a unit test coverage for the certificate manager.

- `pkg/kubelet/certificate`: `2024-01-17` - `52.1`

##### Integration tests

There are tests in `pkg/kubelet/certificate/bootstrap`.

##### e2e tests

> Discussing this feature in sig-auth it was suggested that integration tests should be sufficient

Reviewer 2: As long as the apiserver is configured to validate Kubelet serving certificates, and this feature is enabled, then it's functionality will be covered by a number existing E2E tests (anything that touches the kubelet serving path, e.g. exec/attach/portforward/logs).

Can you confirm whether any E2E test suites match this configuration?

> Discussing this feature in sig-auth it was suggested that integration tests should be sufficient
> 
> NA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We won't do any end to end tests; this is because SIG Auth feel that integration tests provide sufficient
coverage.
```
?

I think an optional end to end test would be nice to have, even so.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

N/A: this is retroactive KEP, feature is already in Beta

#### Beta

This is retroactive KEP, feature is already in Beta

- [ ] Metrics promoted to Beta:
  - `certificate_manager_server_rotation_seconds`
  - `certificate_manager_server_ttl_seconds`
  - `server_expiration_renew_errors`

- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/122834

#### GA

- [x] Feature is actively used with the positive feedback
- [ ] Metrics promoted to GA:
  - `certificate_manager_server_rotation_seconds`
  - `certificate_manager_server_ttl_seconds`
  - `server_expiration_renew_errors`
- [ ] There are conformance tests for the certificates API endpoint, functionality

>   itself do not require covering with conformance tests

Reviewer 2: nit: don't make this a check box. It sounds like this is rationalizing the fact that conformance tests aren't part of the GA criteria?

Author: This is the template for PRR.

- [ ] Documentation created: https://github.com/kubernetes/website/issues/30575

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Feature exists for a long time, no risk for Upgrade/Downgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy

Feature exists for a long time, no risk for version skew.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

> Feature exists for a long time, no risk for Enablement and Rollback.

Reviewer: If someone has been explicitly disabling this feature gate, can they roll back to a version before it became GA? Any problem if they do?

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

Configuration settings must be used - command line argument
(`--rotate-server-certificates`: deprecated) or Node config flag
`serverTLSBootstrap`.

`serverTLSBootstrap` or `--rotate-server-certificates` can be set to false and the feature will be disabled.

In beta, it is also possible to turn the feature flag off. This is not possible in GA.

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No, unless kubelet uses special config.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

> Kubelet will not start unless configuration will be changed to useself-signed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubelet will not start unless configuration will be changed to use a self-signed
```

Does the replacement certificate _have_ to be self-signed?

certificate.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

N/A

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

> N/A

Reviewer: Why isn't this applicable?

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

N/A

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

N/A

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

> N/A

Reviewer: Why isn't this applicable?

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

N/A

### Monitoring Requirements

> N/A

Reviewer: Why isn't this applicable?

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

Yes, using metrics 

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

> N/A

Reviewer: Why isn't this applicable?

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

Metrics can be used to determine the speed of cert update.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [ ] Metrics
  - Metric name:
  - [Optional] Aggregation method:
  - Components exposing the metric:
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)

>   - Details:

Reviewer: This needs answering.

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).

> -->

Reviewer: This section needs answering.

### Dependencies

- Certificate Signing Request API. This API is GA.
- Configuration to approve signing requests.

This feature only works when properly configured.

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

> No

Reviewer 2: Doesn't this depend on a CSR approver?

Author: What usually approves CSRs? I'm not very well versed in this area so I'm interested to learn more.

### Scalability

Certificate signing requests for rotating the cert are executed on TTL
expiration. This should not introduce any scalability challenges.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

Yes, certificate signing requests.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

> No

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes, CertificateSigningRequests.
```

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

No

### Troubleshooting

> Failure to get certificate can be troubleshooted using logs.

Reviewer: Do we need any more detail here?

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

- If it's a bootstrap, kubelet will not become functional.
- If it is a rotation, kubelet will become non-functional unless will be able to

>   renew the certificate.

Reviewer 2: I assume it will keep using the old cert until expiration? And I also assume kubelet would continue to function, but it's serving cert would be invalid? API server can be configured to ignore kubelet serving cert verification.

###### What are other known failure modes?

None

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

- alpha: "v1.7"
- beta: "v1.12"

## Drawbacks

None

## Alternatives

> N/A

Reviewer: Why “N/A”? Maybe:
```suggestion
_None identified_
```
